he reads: what soul suffers in secret, the flesh shows openly.
 
 
    deep within, in a region hardly accessible, a bold self-image
sends messages of bloodshed and conquest, which reverberate in
his heart of hearts.
 
 
    [i forget which hand is writing.]
 
 
    he does not doubt that he exists.
 
 
    the five senses have left their mark on him. it is a record of
what has happened to him, but he cannot talk or travel until he
finds a body of water.
 
 
    a man who has lived on reindeer’s flesh amuses himself with
ripples.
 
 
    in this cage was once a nightingale. in the echo, new words
for wind.
 
 
    the usual convulsions, and a green cat. and, after all, months
or years are nothing to him.
 
 
    [my image contains his body.]
 
 
    his body contains bodies.
 
 
    blemishes.
 
 
    inglories.
 
    vague figures, in a howling wind, and with no notion of
perspective.
 
 
    of countless ruined worlds, he would appropriate the
essential emblem. wall struggling with wall, shadow with shad-
ow.
 
 
    thousands of miles a day.
 
 
    he gazes across an unguarded cemetery—gazes idly, waiting
for new equipment.
 
 
    as through a fixed window, he finds a kind of space, the
visible world foreshortened.
 
 
    he does not see deeply, but—still—one thing behind another.
 
 
    he keeps a tiny bird, folded like a sheet of paper.
 
 
    twice two is four—still—and a circle has no angles.
 
 
    body sheds shoulder, jaw. however body may appear, the soul
comes back in scars.
 
 
    [there are no dead. only names.]
 
 
    too close, ruin wrinkles the surface—his breath bothers
reality. the sun pours down. the pots are mended.
 
 
    an unfolding, from where it is all contained.
 
 
    the ships have been salvaged. [i do not know what body he
has in mind.] clothing is resumed. temples are rebuilt.
 
    “which body?” we inquire, while all the liars cry out,
“verily!”
 
 
    as though all this were in the dark.
 
 
    here is a column of soldiers, a heap of apples, an avenue of
trees. here a swarm of bees, of birds, a row of equidistant lines.
a set of unequal objects distributes the field of vision.
 
 
    here is the painted world in an actual image. [i have no
theory for the clouds he sees.]