in an uncurtained room across the way
a woman in a tight dress paints her lips
a deeper red, and sizes up her hips
for signs of ounces gained since yesterday.
she has a thoughtful and a clever face,
but she is also smart enough to know
the truth: however large the brain may grow,
the lashes and the earrings must keep pace.
although i’ve spread my books in front of me
with a majestic air of i’ll show her,
i’m much less confident than i’d prefer,
and now i’ve started pacing nervously.
i’m poring over theorems, tomes and tracts.
i’m getting ready for a heavy date
by staying up ridiculously late.
but a small voice advises, face the facts:
go on this way and you’ll soon come to harm.
the world’s most famous scholars wander down
the most appalling alleyways in town,
a blond and busty airhead on each arm.
there is an inner motor known as lust
that makes a man of learning walk a mile
to gratify his raging senses, while
the woman he can talk to gathers dust.
a chilling vision of the years ahead
invades my thoughts, and widens like a stain:
a barren dance card and a teeming brain,
a crowded bookcase and an empty bed...
what if i compromised? i’d stay up late
to hone my elocutionary skills,
and at the crack of dawn i’d swallow pills
to calm my temper and control my weight,
but i just can’t. romantics, so far gone
they think their lovers live for wisdom, woo
by growing wiser; when i think of you
i find the nearest lamp and turn it on.
great gods of longing, watch me as i work
and if i sprout a martyr’s smarmy grin
please find some violent way to do me in;
i’m burning all these candles not to shirk
a night of passion, but to give that night
a richly textured backdrop when it comes.
the girl who gets up from her desk and dumbs
her discourse down has never seen the flight
of wide-eyed starlings from their shabby cage;
the fool whose love is truest is the one
who knows a lover’s work is never done.
i’ll call you when i’ve finished one more page.