          before the god-bullied hull, call me—
          before the god-bullied hull buckles, before
          the red flag unfurled on water bucks and drowns,
          before the sky-hawk dives down, before
          the nail drives through the sky-hawk’s red-wing—
          call me
                      the nail driven through the wing
          and call me the wing driven through.
                                                                a board
          on water is buoyant, i know: i cling to wood—
          a dictionary buckles and drowns. i know
          i do not drown: i’m abridged, afloat, call me—
sir, when my book arrives, when each page
you’ve untied lets go the breath it held
that was my breath, then my breath will not be mine—
i think you’ll know. i know when doors open
i mean to keep closed: study-door, desk-drawer.
my wife found the key i hid beneath the fern.
my pens she did not touch. she did not touch
the hundred pages i left blank to fill other days.
she took the cracked compass i keep for luck
(the needle’s sharp, but stuck), took my green-glass
ink-pot, and centering the compass on my desk,
poured out each dark drop of ink unitl ink
seeped through cracked glass and left the compass
ink-full. the gold needle loosened, floated: a line.
          bent back, i am taking you inside my head
          turning back. ahab bent
          the needle that refused north
                                                      back to a magnet’s tow—
          did, ahab did, after
          the needle’s faith answered our question: no.
          how do you point at a horizon? ask me. i know.
          needle out your arm: close eyes:
          and turn in a circle. inscribe a zero on the wood-deck—
          the equator on zero
                              latitudes lies. that is the truth, i know
sir, what name that bay a last page carves
out of no shore: ice? glacier? greenland?
strand, shoal-of-white-sand? an artic-calm?
how live, sir, there—where i’ve been sailing?
let me list for you, the cargo in my hold:
a brush, a mirror gilt-in-gold, a gold strand
of wife’s hair, a dirty plate, a sink with no water,
a white-sheeted bed, a finger with a ring
that the ring hates. sir, these bound pages
are bound for you. i’ve a compass
full of ink. i see i need repair, plank
by plank, my boat, while ocean-bound, while afloat.
          i’m
          orphan, ishmael, equator-line:
          a man alone equals the wave before it crests,
          wave, before crest, equals the needle turning,
          needle turning equals the flinch of a hawk-wing,
          a hawk-wing’s flinch is heaven turning
          away. men swallow water
sir, i meant not to be so much myself
as i am. i meant to keep my mouth closed
when wife asked, “should i go?” and i said: “go.”
bow-of-the-bed, empty bow. i’m captain,
i guess, now. i fold the blank sheet back
each morning. there’s a page i mean to read.
no hand wrote it. it’s white. it hides white
inside another page of white. how, sir—
open a page inside a page? how, sir, do you
read the page that was written so you could not
read it. i know, i think i know. you sleep,
or step, or slip beneath the surface of the bed
and learn to breathe as paper breathes: with other’s breath.
          and then water swallows men. a grave-magnet
          pulls them down. fathom me—
          editor, fathom me. i am a known depth. i’m a
          definition easy: a man, a mortal man.
          a man with five needles on each hand
          pointing heavenward. heed me. i’m lost.