                                  1 
when the world turns completely upside down
you say we’ll emigrate to the eastern shore
aboard a river-boat from baltimore;
we’ll live among wild peach trees, miles from town,
you’ll wear a coonskin cap, and i a gown
homespun, dyed butternut’s dark gold color.
lost, like your lotus-eating ancestor,
we’ll swim in milk and honey till we drown.
the winter will be short, the summer long,
the autumn amber-hued, sunny and hot,
tasting of cider and of scuppernong;
all seasons sweet, but autumn best of all.
the squirrels in their silver fur will fall
like falling leaves, like fruit, before your shot.
                                  2 
the autumn frosts will lie upon the grass
like bloom on grapes of purple-brown and gold.
the misted early mornings will be cold;
the little puddles will be roofed with glass.
the sun, which burns from copper into brass,
melts these at noon, and makes the boys unfold
their knitted mufflers; full as they can hold
fat pockets dribble chestnuts as they pass.
peaches grow wild, and pigs can live in clover;
a barrel of salted herrings lasts a year;
the spring begins before the winter’s over.
by february you may find the skins
of garter snakes and water moccasins
dwindled and harsh, dead-white and cloudy-clear.
                                  3 
when april pours the colors of a shell
upon the hills, when every little creek
is shot with silver from the chesapeake
in shoals new-minted by the ocean swell,
when strawberries go begging, and the sleek
blue plums lie open to the blackbird’s beak,
we shall live well — we shall live very well.
the months between the cherries and the peaches
are brimming cornucopias which spill
fruits red and purple, sombre-bloomed and black;
then, down rich fields and frosty river beaches
we’ll trample bright persimmons, while you kill
bronze partridge, speckled quail, and canvasback.
                                  4 
down to the puritan marrow of my bones
there’s something in this richness that i hate.
i love the look, austere, immaculate,
of landscapes drawn in pearly monotones.
there’s something in my very blood that owns
bare hills, cold silver on a sky of slate,
a thread of water, churned to milky spate
streaming through slanted pastures fenced with stones.
i love those skies, thin blue or snowy gray,
those fields sparse-planted, rendering meagre sheaves;
that spring, briefer than apple-blossom’s breath,
summer, so much too beautiful to stay,
swift autumn, like a bonfire of leaves,
and sleepy winter, like the sleep of death.