i. troppo allegro
remember seasons? seem to recall those once were easier.
reasonably sequenced, regal of tempo and temper,
reliable change flipped heads-over-tails each quarter,
recovering the hemisphere with four fine suits, knock-off designer.
recently, someone shuffled, cut the deck into disorder:
relapse, tic, hiccup, snap, weeks reissued like hipster
rediscoveries    ...    join the club! no closer
reading required to diagnose this crazy weather:
record highs, flourishing lows. april even crueler
recapitulated each fortnight. spring hailing like a howitzer.
reek of summer tickling autumn’s automatic sprinkler.
redder-neck sunbathers burnt by november’s toaster. a warbler
retweeting keats, well into winter. a death for easter.
ii. funeral: march
remember: misremembering that fishy faulkner
remark, the dead are never passed. ask: will this chapter
retain familiar cycles? lather, rinse, repeat. swelter,
reins, release. welter, ruins, reseed. seconds per
revolution: top-heavy spinning, simian moods over-
reaching from swing to swing. for reveler,
read revelator: elevator going upper, downer,
results of a heart dialed three degrees warmer.
remedial ecclesiastes: a time for x, and a-whole-nother
reciprocal time for x’s refrain, a dinner
reservation for six — make that five — and an altogether
regrettable time for the long and short divisions of disaster.
remainder: only a matter of time. no more time to matter.
iii. scherzo: presto chango
“remember, the world’s stage was not set for your metaphor, christopher
rex, tragicomic motherfucker:
recognize, why don’t you, your relish for the realish, for hinter-gatherer
relationships between the dank diamond mine of  your inner
resources and the real world (remember that?), our fixer-upper
residence imperiled enough without your cheesier
regrets stinking up the joint — shoulda, coulda, woulda, gouda. character
reassessment sure is fun, but don’t run down the theater.
regards, responsive reader / longtime listener / other: _______ ”
(re: that critique, one childhood scene i’ll offer:
relatives teasingly wondered why my “gatekeeper,”
regulator of mind and mouth, would wander
regularly away from his post. still no answer.)
iv. finale: re-fugue
remember with me (it’s not all mine to remember),
remind me, under this never-better weather, whether, if ever,
“real time” and its dead-ahead march to an unlucky number
really feel right as a royal flush, since time seems so much fairer
rewound — recoiling counterclockwise, the seasons’ order
restoring, entropy decreasing, days uncreasing — now faster,
regress infinitely, till the spaide family tree, our off-kilter calder,
recollects its fallen leaves — relief, pains, laughter,
reverse it, past, even, it’s not — trust i tamper
respectfully, gatekeeper, but why not even further,
reductio ad absurdum, back to the very scene i enter
rehearsal, ninety-nine degrees, summer-hot, set to simmer,
ready or not, on the twenty-first day of december?