a mile out in the marshes, under a sky
which seems to be always going away
in a hurry, on that venetian land threaded
with hidden canals, you will find the city
which seconds ours (so cemeteries, too,
reflect a town from hillsides out of town),
where being most becomingly ends up
becoming some more. from cardboard tenements,
windowed with cellophane, or simply tenting
in paper bags, the angry mackerel eyes
glare at you out of stove-in, sunken heads
far from the sea; the lobster, also, lifts
an empty claw in his most minatory
of gestures; oyster, crab, and mussel shells
lie here in heaps, savage as money hurled
away at the gate of hell. if you want results,
these are results.
                          objects of value or virtue,
however, are also to be picked up here,
though rarely, lying with bones and rotten meat,
eggshells and mouldy bread, banana peels
no one will skid on, apple cores that caused
neither the fall of man nor a theory
of gravitation. people do throw out
the family pearls by accident, sometimes,
not often; i’ve known dealers in antiques
to prowl this place by night, with flashlights, on
the off-chance of somebody’s having left
derelict chairs which will turn out to be
by hepplewhite, a perfect set of six
going to show, i guess, that in any sty
someone’s heaven may open and shower down
riches responsive to the right dream; though
it is a small chance, certainly, that sends
the ghostly dealer, heavy with fly-netting
over his head, across these hills in darkness,
stumbling in cut-glass goblets, lacquered cups,
and other products of his dreamy midden
penciled with light and guarded by the flies.
for there are flies, of course. a dynamo
composed, by thousands, of our ancient black
retainers, hums here day and night, steady
as someone telling beads, the hum becoming
a high whine at any disturbance; then,
settled again, they shine under the sun
like oil-drops, or are invisible as night,
by night.
             all this continually smoulders,
crackles, and smokes with mostly invisible fires
which, working deep, rarely flash out and flare,
and never finish. nothing finishes;
the flies, feeling the heat, keep on the move.
among the flies, the purefying fires,
the hunters by night, acquainted with the art
of our necessities, and the new deposits
that each day wastes with treasure, you may say
there should be ratios. you may sum up
the results, if you want results. but i will add
that wild birds, drawn to the carrion and flies,
assemble in some numbers here, their wings
shining with light, their flight enviably free,
their music marvelous, though sad, and strange.