backward, turn backward, o time, in your flight,
make me a child again just for tonight!
mother, come back from the echoless shore,
take me again to your heart as of yore;
kiss from my forehead the furrows of care,
smooth the few silver threads out of my hair;
over my slumbers your loving watch keep;—      
rock me to sleep, mother, – rock me to sleep!
backward, flow backward, o tide of the years!
i am so weary of toil and of tears,—      
toil without recompense, tears all in vain,—   
take them, and give me my childhood again!
i have grown weary of dust and decay,—   
weary of flinging my soul-wealth away;
weary of sowing for others to reap;—   
rock me to sleep, mother – rock me to sleep!
tired of the hollow, the base, the untrue,
mother, o mother, my heart calls for you!
many a summer the grass has grown green,
blossomed and faded, our faces between:
yet, with strong yearning and passionate pain,
long i tonight for your presence again.
come from the silence so long and so deep;—   
rock me to sleep, mother, – rock me to sleep!
over my heart, in the days that are flown,
no love like mother-love ever has shone;
no other worship abides and endures,—      
faithful, unselfish, and patient like yours:
none like a mother can charm away pain
from the sick soul and the world-weary brain.
slumber’s soft calms o’er my heavy lids creep;—      
rock me to sleep, mother, – rock me to sleep!
come, let your brown hair, just lighted with gold,
fall on your shoulders again as of old;
let it drop over my forehead tonight,
shading my faint eyes away from the light;
for with its sunny-edged shadows once more
haply will throng the sweet visions of yore;
lovingly, softly, its bright billows sweep;—   
rock me to sleep, mother, – rock me to sleep!
mother, dear mother, the years have been long
since i last listened your lullaby song:
sing, then, and unto my soul it shall seem
womanhood’s years have been only a dream.
clasped to your heart in a loving embrace,
with your light lashes just sweeping my face,
never hereafter to wake or to weep;—      
rock me to sleep, mother, – rock me to sleep!