i took a contract to bury the body of blasphemous bill mackie,
whenever, wherever or whatsoever the manner of death he die —
whether he die in the light o’ day or under the peak-faced moon;
in cabin or dance-hall, camp or dive, mucklucks or patent shoon;
on velvet tundra or virgin peak, by glacier, drift or draw;
in muskeg hollow or canyon gloom, by avalanche, fang or claw;
by battle, murder or sudden wealth, by pestilence, hooch or lead —
i swore on the book i would follow and look till i found my tombless dead.
for bill was a dainty kind of cuss, and his mind was mighty sot
on a dinky patch with flowers and grass in a civilized boneyard lot.
and where he died or how he died, it didn’t matter a damn
so long as he had a grave with frills and a tombstone “epigram.”
so i promised him, and he paid the price in good cheechako coin
(which the same i blowed in that very night down in the tenderloin).
then i painted a three-foot slab of pine: “here lies poor bill mackie,”
and i hung it up on my cabin wall and i waited for bill to die.
years passed away, and at last one day came a squaw with a story strange,
of a long-deserted line of traps ’way back of the bighorn range,
of a little hut by the great divide, and a white man stiff and still,
lying there by his lonesome self, and i figured it must be bill.
so i thought of the contract i’d made with him, and i took down from the shelf
the swell black box with the silver plate he’d picked out for hisself;
and i packed it full of grub and “hooch,” and i slung it on the sleigh;
then i harnessed up my team of dogs and was off at dawn of day.
you know what it’s like in the yukon wild when it’s sixty-nine below;
when the ice-worms wriggle their purple heads through the crust of the pale blue snow;
when the pine-trees crack like little guns in the silence of the wood,
and the icicles hang down like tusks under the parka hood;
when the stove-pipe smoke breaks sudden off, and the sky is weirdly lit,
and the careless feel of a bit of steel burns like a red-hot spit;
when the mercury is a frozen ball, and the frost-fiend stalks to kill —
well, it was just like that that day when i set out to look for bill.
oh, the awful hush that seemed to crush me down on every hand,
as i blundered blind with a trail to find through that blank and bitter land;
half dazed, half crazed in the winter wild, with its grim heartbreaking woes,
and the ruthless strife for a grip on life that only the sourdough knows!
north by the compass, north i pressed; river and peak and plain
passed like a dream i slept to lose and i waked to dream again.
river and plain and mighty peak — and who could stand unawed?
as their summits blazed, he could stand undazed at the foot of the throne of god.
north, aye, north, through a land accurst, shunned by the scouring brutes,
and all i heard was my own harsh word and the whine of the malamutes,
till at last i came to a cabin squat, built in the side of a hill,
and i burst in the door, and there on the floor, frozen to death, lay bill.
ice, white ice, like a winding-sheet, sheathing each smoke-grimed wall;
ice on the stove-pipe, ice on the bed, ice gleaming over all;
sparkling ice on the dead man’s chest, glittering ice in his hair,
ice on his fingers, ice in his heart, ice in his glassy stare;
hard as a log and trussed like a frog, with his arms and legs outspread.
i gazed at the coffin i’d brought for him, and i gazed at the gruesome dead,
and at last i spoke: “bill liked his joke; but still, goldarn his eyes,
a man had ought to consider his mates in the way he goes and dies.”
have you ever stood in an arctic hut in the shadow of the pole,
with a little coffin six by three and a grief you can’t control?
have you ever sat by a frozen corpse that looks at you with a grin,
and that seems to say: “you may try all day, but you’ll never jam me in”?
i’m not a man of the quitting kind, but i never felt so blue
as i sat there gazing at that stiff and studying what i’d do.
then i rose and i kicked off the husky dogs that were nosing round about,
and i lit a roaring fire in the stove, and i started to thaw bill out.
well, i thawed and thawed for thirteen days, but it didn’t seem no good;
his arms and legs stuck out like pegs, as if they was made of wood.
till at last i said: “it ain’t no use — he’s froze too hard to thaw;
he’s obstinate, and he won’t lie straight, so i guess i got to — saw.”
so i sawed off poor bill’s arms and legs, and i laid him snug and straight
in the little coffin he picked hisself, with the dinky silver plate,
and i came nigh near to shedding a tear as i nailed him safely down;
then i stowed him away in my yukon sleigh, and i started back to town.
so i buried him as the contract was in a narrow grave and deep,
and there he’s waiting the great clean-up, when the judgment sluice-heads sweep;
and i smoke my pipe and i meditate in the light of the midnight sun,
and sometimes i wonder if they was, the awful things i done.
and as i sit and the parson talks, expounding of the law,
i often think of poor old bill — and how hard he was to saw.