roxana from the court retiring late,
sigh'd her soft sorrows at st. james's gate:
such heavy thoughts lay brooding in her breast,
not her own chairmen wth more weight opprest;
they groan the cruel load they're doom'd to bear ;
she in these gentler sounds express'd her care.
" was it for this, that i these roses wear,
" for this new-set my jewels for my hair ?
" ah ! princess ! with what zeal have i pursu'd !
" almost forgot the duty of a prude.
" thinking i never cou'd attend too soon,
" i've miss'd my prayers, to get me dress'd by noon.
" for thee, ah ! what for thee did i resign ?
" my pleasures, passions, all that e'er was mine.
" i sacrific'd both modesty and ease,
" left operas, and went to filthy plays ;
" double entendres shock'd my tender ear,
" yet even this for thee i chose to bear.
" in glowing youth, when nature bids be gay,
" and ev'ry joy of life before me lay,
" by honour prompted, and by pride restrain'd,
" the pleasures of the young my soul disdain'd :
" sermons i sought, and with a mien severe
" censur'd my neighbours, and said daily pray'r.
" alas ! how chang'd! — with the same sermon mien
" that once i pray'd, the what-d'ye call't i've seen.
" ah ! cruel princess, for thy sake i've lost
" that reputation which so dear had cost :
" i, who avoided ev'ry publick place,
" when bloom, and beauty bid me show my face ;
" now near thee constant ev'ry night abide
" with never-failing duty by thy side,
" myself and daughters standing on a row,
" to all the foreigners a goodly show !
" oft had your drawing-room been sadly thin,
" and merchants wives close by the chair had been seen ;
" had not i amply fill'd the empty space,
" and sav'd your highness from the dire disgrace.
" yet coquetilla's artifice prevails,
" when all my merit and my duty fails :
" that coquetilla, whose deluding airs
" corrupts our virgins, and our youth ensnares ;
" so sunk her character, so lost her fame,
" scarce visited before your highness came ;
" yet for the bed-chamber 'tis her you chuse,
" when zeal and fame and virtue you refuse.
" ah ! worthy choice ! not one of all your train
" whom censure blasts not, and dishonours stain.
" let the nice hind now suckle dirty pigs,
" and the proud pea-hen snatch the cuckoo's eggs !
" let iris leave her paint, and own her age,
" and grave suffolkia wed a giddy page !
" a greater miracle is daily view'd,
" a virtuous princess with a court so lewd.
" i know thee, court ! with all thy treach'rous wiles,
" thy false caresses and undoing smiles !
" ah ! princess, learn'd in all the courtly arts
" to cheat our hopes, and yet to gain our hearts.
" large lovely bribes are the great statesman's aim ;
" and the neglected patriot follows fame.
" the prince is ogled ; some the king pursue ;
" but your roxana only follows you.
" despis'd roxana, cease, and try to find
" some other, since the princess proves unkind :
" perhaps it is not hard to find at court
" if not a greater, a more firm support.