flavia. the wretched flavia on her couch reclin'd,
thus breath'd the anguish of a wounded mind ;
a glass revers'd in her right hand she bore,
for now she shun'd the face she sought before.
' how am i chang'd ! alas ! how am i grown
' a frightful spectre, to myself unknown !
' where's my complexion ? where the radiant bloom,
' that promis'd happiness for years to come ?
' then with what pleasure i this face survey'd !
' to look once more, my visits oft delay'd !
' charm'd with the view, a fresher red would rise,
' and a new life shot sparkling from my eyes !
' ah ! faithless glass, my wonted bloom restore;
' alas ! i rave, that bloom is now no more !
' the greatest good the gods on men bestow,
' ev'n youth itself, to me is useless now.
' there was a time, (oh ! that i could forget !)
' when opera-tickets pour'd before my feet ;
' and at the ring, where brightest beauties shine,
' the earliest cherries of the spring were mine.
' witness, o lilly ; and thou, motteux, tell
' how much japan these eyes have made ye sell.
' with what contempt ye you saw me oft despise
' the humble offer of the raffled prize ;
' for at the raffle still the prize i bore,
' with scorn rejected, or with triumph wore !
' now beauty's fled, and presents are no more !
' for me the patriot has the house forsook,
' and left debates to catch a passing look :
' for me the soldier has soft verses writ ;
' for me the beau has aim'd to be a wit.
' for me the wit to nonsense was betray'd ;
' the gamester has for me his dun delay'd,
' and overseen the card, i would have play'd.
' the bold and haughty by success made vain,
' aw'd by my eyes has trembled to complain:
' the bashful 'squire touch'd by a wish unknown,
' has dar'd to speak with spirit not his own ;
' fir'd by one wish, all did alike adore ;
' now beauty's fled, and lovers are no more!
' as round the room i turn my weeping eyes,
' new unaffected scenes of sorrow rise !
' far from my sight that killing picture bear,
' the face disfigure, and the canvas tear !
' that picture which with pride i us'd to show,
' the lost resemblance but upbraids me now.
' and thou, my toilette! where i oft have sat,
' while hours unheeded pass'd in deep debate,
' how curls should fall, or where a patch to place :
' if blue or scarlet best became my face;
' now on some happier nymph thy aid bestow ;
' on fairer heads, ye useless jewels glow !
' no borrow'd lustre can my charms restore ;
' beauty is fled, and dress is now no more !
' ye meaner beauties, i permit ye shine ;
' go, triumph in the hearts that once were mine ;
' but midst your triumphs with confusion know,
' 'tis to my ruin all your arms ye owe.
' would pitying heav'n restore my wonted mien,
' ye still might move unthought-of and unseen.
' but oh ! how vain, how wretched is the boast
' of beauty faded, and of empire lost !
' what now is left but weeping, to deplore
' my beauty fled, and empire now no more !
' ye, cruel chymists, what with-held your aid !
' could no pomatums save a trembling maid ?
' how false and trifling is that art you boast ;
' no art can give me back my beauty lost.
' in tears, surrounded by my friends i lay,
' mask'd o'er and trembled at the sight of day;
' mirmillo came my fortune to deplore,
' (a golden headed cane, well carv'd he bore)
' cordials, he cried, my spirits must restore :
' beauty is fled, and spirit is no more !
' galen, the grave ; officious squirt was there,
' with fruitless grief and unavailing care :
' machaon too, the great machaon, known
' by his red cloak and his superior frown ;
' and why, he cry'd, this grief and this despair ?
' you shall again be well, again be fair ;
' believe my oath ; (with that an oath he swore)
' false was his oath ; my beauty is no more !
' cease, hapless maid, no more thy tale pursue,
' forsake mankind, and bid the world adieu !
' monarchs and beauties rule with equal sway ;
' all strive to serve, and glory to obey :
' alike unpitied when depos'd they grow ;
' men mock the idol of their former vow.
' adieu ! ye parks ! — in some obscure recess,
' where gentle streams will weep at my distress,
' where no false friend will in my grief take part,
' and mourn my ruin with a joyful heart ;
' there let me live in some deserted place,
' there hide in shades this lost inglorious face.
' ye, operas, circles, i no more must view !
' my toilette, patches, all the world adieu!