silliander and patch. thou so many favours hast receiv'd,
wondrous to tell, and hard to be believ'd,
oh ! h—— d, to my lays attention lend,
hear how two lovers boastingly contend ;
like thee successful, such their bloomy youth,
renown'd alike for gallantry and truth.
st. james's bell had toll'd some wretches in,
(as tatter'd riding-hoods alone could sin)
the happier sinners now their charms put out,
and to their manteaus their complexions suit :
the opera queens had finish'd half their faces,
and city-dames allready taken places ;
fops of all kinds to see the lion, run ;
the beauties stay till the first act's begun,
and beaux step home to put fresh linen on.
no well-dress'd youth in coffee-house remain'd,
but pensive patch, who on the window lean'd ;
and silliander, that alert and gay,
first pick'd his teeth, and then began to say.
silliander. why all these sighs ? ah ! why so pensive grown ?
some cause there is that thus you sit alone.
does hapless passion all this sorrow move ?
or dost thou envy where the ladies love ?
patch. if, whom they love, my envy must pursue,
'tis sure, at least, i never envy you.
silliander. no, i'm unhappy, you are in the right,
'tis you they favour, and 'tis me they slight.
yet i could tell, but that i hate to boast,
a club of ladies where 'tis me they toast.
patch. toasting does seldom any favour prove ;
like us, they never toast the thing they love.
a certain duke one night my health begun ;
with chearful pledges round the room it run,
till the young silvia press'd to drink it too,
started, and vow'd she knew not what to do :
what, drink a fellow's health ! she dy'd with shame :
yet blush'd whenever she pronounc'd my name.
silliander. ill fates pursue me, may i never find
the dice propitious, or the ladies kind,
if fair miss flippy's fan i did not tear,
and one from me she condescends to wear.
patch. women are always ready to receive ;
'tis then a favour when the sex will give.
a lady (but she is too great to name)
beauteous in person, spotless is her fame,
with gentle strugglings let me force this ring ;
another day may give another thing.
silliander. i cou'd say something — see this billet-doux —
and as for presents — look upon my shoe —
these buckles were not forc'd, nor half a theft,
but a young countess fondly made the gift.
patch. my countess is more nice, more artful too,
affects to fly that i may fierce pursue :
this snuff-box which i begg'd, she still deny'd,
and when i strove to snatch it, seem'd to hide ;
she laugh'd and fled, and as i sought to seize,
with affectation cramm'd it down her stays :
yet hop'd she did not place it there unseen,
i press'd her breasts, and pull'd it from between.
silliander. last night, as i stood ogling of her grace,
drinking delicious poison from her face,
the soft enchantress did that face decline,
nor ever rais'd her eyes to meet with mine ;
with sudden art some secret did pretend,
lean'd cross two chairs to whisper to a friend,
while the stiff whalebone with the motion rose,
and thousand beauties to my sight expose.
patch. early this morn — (but i was ask'd to come)
i drank bohea in cælia's dressing-room :
warm from her bed, to me alone within,
her night-gown fasten'd with a single pin ;
her night-cloaths tumbled with resistless grace,
and her bright hair play'd careless round her face ;
reaching the kettle, made her gown unpin,
she wore no waistcoat, and her shift was thin.
silliander. see titiana driving to the park,
hark ! let us follow, 'tis not yet too dark ;
in her all beauties of the spring are seen,
her cheeks are rosy, and her mantle green.
patch. see, tintoretta to the opera goes !
haste, or the crowd will not permit our bows ;
in her the glory of the heav'ns we view,
her eyes are star-like, and her mantle blue.
silliander. what colour does in cælia's stockings shine ?
reveal that secret, and the prize is thine.
patch. what are her garters ! tell me if you can ;
i'll freely own thee for the happier man.
thus patch continued his heroic strain,
while silliander but contends in vain.
after a conquest so important gain'd,
unrival'd patch in ev'ry ruelle reign'd.