after the bullet discharges through the tunnel of his mouth,
               after it shatters
 
the oklahoma evening, rips through ragweed & across many rivers,
               my apartment in pittsburgh,
 
the metal clips my arm, slams into a plaster wall,
               & the silence is his
 
body slackening & the black fact of the gun underwater.
 
i compress my wound as his ghost kneels beside his body,
               the bathtub, &
                              as his ghost draws the shower curtain back,
 
i look away. no, i don’t want to know his secrets, why
                              surer hands will tag, bag as evidence.
 
he is a poet. he makes the difficult question of speaking
               a matter of remembering
                              how he shouted the poems he loved.
 
his outbursts were pure country. yes, rumors circulated,
                              how vets suffer
 
medication, what he saw as a s.e.a.l., how weird,
               & no one could stand
                                             the belabored way he read aloud,
 
& i said all the above & more, & to his face
               when no one was around when he finally caught on,
i asked him, ‘why are you quieter? i’ve noticed, & it scares me.’
 
                                                  *
 
even now i’m busy with details, the dirty work of gathering.
 
here’s rosemary & some pansies, that’s for thoughts
               rambled to me one fall afternoon, cathedral of learning,
 
how komunyakaa showed him a way to anchor a moment
               between stillness & approach
 
turning toward tall grass or a woman’s wet hair to braid,
               or how it could lock arms with an enemy,
 
lose to an overwhelming grasp, or listen to the dying
               echo of paradise birds singing
 
so much gibberish, as if a whole life could be reduced to one image
               dangling from a fist & engraved with a number,
 
as if a poem wants only to be identified upon delivery,
               which was why daniel read blake,
 
calvino & crane for fire & crystal. why he shut himself up
               with bishop. why stern’s huge breath,
 
why oppen, tu fu & paz. lewis & vollmer mattered
               for their generosities, lines layered like the earth
                              in his face,
 
the reds & browns of his voice deepening to what he pursued,
               half-formed in haze
 
& burrowing underneath to avoid tripwire, & daniel yelling as he
               plunged after its gray, disappearing shape.
 
                                                  *
 
i listen to his ghost pace the hallway as if barefoot across dirt,
               fronds like unfurled scrolls, rustle.
 
root scent & rainfall stain his cheeks with welcome, risk.
               he has walked far to finish this conversation between us.
 
he brushes against the wood, taps the doorknob trying to explain
               the jagged web of cracks in my wall,
 
hot metal at the center like a labyrinth chamber
               or the slick tip of a widow
 
hunched over & spinning a bundle or the pure ore from a journey
               toward sublimation, a soul’s treasure,
 
or the soul, itself, lodged in a network & inconsolable
               because wings never guaranteed perfect pitch.
 
                                                  *
 
daniel, the scar on my arm fades as i read your poems again,
               & the maps you drew
 
time spackles over for a move out west.
 
the twenty that someone taped to my office desk for flowers
               remains unspent,
                              a bookmarker for a ramses biography.
 
i tried.   i couldn’t find your permanent address.
 
daniel, the news today proclaims disaster, code orange to survive
               for tomorrow’s headline
 
that you were right could, at any moment, slip under a thicket,
               emerge skittish beside a pile of leaves,
 
its long gray nose & black eyes focused on your movements.
 
how you wrote it down, my friend, held it
               in the starless night
                              & gave it pink fingers with which to scratch back.
 