i early morning
the rain, gray god with its huge hands
has shredded the roses, and clapping,
kept us up all night, the bridge washed out,
the troll waiting to gobble a goat.
how long has he been there, wet and cold,
impatient, starving, his coat
rent with welts and matted with mist?
father, thundering, his voice full
of  bracken and leaves, leaves that in
the autumn clogged the gutters. who
goes over the bridge? who goes there?
       the billy goats stammering, pawing
the air. but i am the goat and the troll
and so cannot pass nor grant passage.
  ii
the high meadow filled with sweet grass!
the spindle puts the moon to bed,
the window latched, the sheets pulled tight,
pincushion star, ram butting his head,
my brother and sister behind and ahead —
his sister was no use to him either,
    she took what was his, cat’s cradle
bridge made of sharp goat’s thread. who
goes there now, over the rickety
bridge? tiny steps, lickety-split,
my place is in the pause between
the thunder and the bridge, father
shouting over the torn white water,
   hoofprints mark the place last seen.
iii at the museum (bellows)
for alexander nemerov
      the man in the left-hand corner
of bellows’s picture of the dempsey-firpo
fight, the picture a dream, so not a real
fight — a picture of a fight — his flayed hide
just visible under his blue pinstripes,
the watcher and the fighter
indistinguishable, one inside
the other, lion and lion tamer,
the paint daubs faces or fingerprints
and the lights staring and staring across
the fretwork of the ring, and bellows
himself, next to him, looking surprised,
as if to be there was to give himself up
without our noticing it, as we all do
 
in a gesture, or word, leaving something
behind we should have taken with us
or even guarded, a way of not letting
something be over and done with.
the fight was over in four minutes flat.
a curious thing about the painting
is that bellows chose to show us
 
the moment when firpo sent dempsey
careening, with a blow to the jaw,
one of the two times he laid him out,
and we, with the spectators crammed
into the foreground of the picture
have to help push dempsey back
into the ring where two-and-a-half
 
minutes later he will defeat firpo,
who went down four times to his two.
in assisi, at the basilica di san francesco,
in the panel in which giotto depicts
the moment francis gives away
his worldly goods, the palm that francis
raises up to the hand that is reaching
 
down to him from heaven, a hand out
of the blue, open, ready to give or
receive wonders, is the same hand
in bellows’s picture raised behind dempsey
one wing of a dove, the impulse is
to press our own palms to it, and despite
our better judgment to hurl him back.
  iv blackbirds
a song that father liked to sing:
     a dozen blackbirds baked alive
but still alive when they did bring
    the pie to set before the king —
    what a flurry when the pie was cut!
       the birds cawed madly as they rose —
blackbirds flapping blackened wings
    who circled back to snip your nose!
 
       i see the moon, the moon sees me,
shining on the apple tree ...
don’t sit under the apple tree
with anyone else but me —
no no, with anyone else but me ...
sound of hurry, over the bridge.
  v at the museum (wyeth)
as always, we want something from the dead,
even the blackbird, stiff in a kind of grassy net,
its black leather gangster feet curled up
as if holding on to something it let go —
and beyond, to the right, inevitably, a house —
black-shuttered with its high gray wing,
its bones buried deep in the earth like a beast
that once took flight, bones with the imprint
of feathers, that print repeated in the far away trees
on a rise to the left of the house, a good distance
away, as if the trees had been painted by pressing
a painted leaf to the canvas, the spine
the tablature of a feather, or fish, the scales
clearly marked in miniature, although we know
the trees are much bigger than the blackbird
so stock-still in the spiky grass, so lately landed,
its glossy mourning coat spit-shined. under
those trees, a short distance from the house
as nowhere else in the picture, a moment
of repose, the sun on the warm bark, the circle
of cool beneath. but the bird holds us fast,
a shadow cast by moonlight, the flowers
beside it articulate as the delphiniums
in la primavera, at the uffizi, at which we
paused until we could look no longer at
an extreme propensity for beauty, as though it
might explode in smithereens. autumn,
the seed pods are moth-eaten moons, dry, rattling.
in wyeth’s more famous picture, the girl
stranded in the foreground in a clutch of weeds
her awkward limbs stretching in the hissing grass
is in the same place in the picture plane
as the blackbird, we all agreed with this,
the woman in the white hat — why a hat,
inside the museum — and her friend, smaller,
dressed all in black, black shoes, black stockings,
black dress, although it is summer.
at once we want to help her as she reaches
the unbridgeable distance of the field
and the meadow filled with rough grass
although it’s not so evident how to help her
for even now our heavy limbs twitch with
enchantment, caught in a dream in which
it is impossible to move except by slithering.
in my sleep you said i said — too many people.
the black house is a ship on the horizon,
every light on, or the moon that looks
as if it is following us but from which
we are always veering away, the white wolf
snapping at our heels, goading us to cross
the bridge or waiting for us by the water
its white face wavering under the pilings.
the girl is a blackbird in the high grass,
it is natural to mistake one for the other
when it is so difficult despite the painter’s
efforts, herculean, really, to see clearly —
  vi saturday night (at the ballet)
        puck, above a game of flashlight tag
the tiniest fairy pirouetting like a dervish —
the honeysuckle wood alit, one pointed
green-shod foot dangling, like the hand that reached
down to francis to pull him up to heaven
or rebuke him, or the white hand coming
out of the darkness over the ring: counting
one, two, three, alley, alley, innisfree —
the three goats balking at the bridge, father
bellowing over the rushing water
the river loud, rearing its head, foam rushing past
its eyes and ears, father clamoring, needing
something — the moment we know
it has come to nothing.
  vii (the dream)
the heavens shift.
and presto! the tilted abacus
of stars slides back in place, twilight’s worn edge rubbed
to a sheen. queen, ass, indian child, love-lit quartet, slipping
   as the constellations do
behind gaia’s unearthly tilt
   leaving us in night’s cooler, less demanding air
where our taxi driver has his phone
on speaker: twenty minutes of harangue,
    a hornet trapped inside a troika, the driver
silent except once to say,
   interrupting the ceaseless string of epithets,
“you are the women of my dreams.”
           lights turn from red to green,
the avenue slick before the curb. remember? the crescent
moon scar on my knee —
           rain patters the windshield, the lights
    from the bodega spatter lime and pink.
             a folded scene.
above, the moon —
             another night before a halt.
  viii evening and morning
morning lit by evening’s lantern, the cat
a baby falling from the broken bough,
childhood’s terrible litter of fear.
i am the goat and the goat is me. i see the moon,
the moon sees me. and if i die before i wake,
the spirit leaving the body as we sleep
as giacomo said in the gospel — who said it, where?
if the spirit leaves my body where does it go?
— and in the dark the pine knots watching
and your eyes big in the dark, and the sound of breathing.
in your sleep you said too many people.
i woke you in the dark and i took you by the hand —
how far is the moon? if i folded this piece of paper?
but then you would never get there, remember?
and your total disregard of me —
twilight’s rainbow a lasso fetching the moon from the water —
when i was walking i fell from the curb.
you did not. i did, i did.
 
  ix the cove
the three children not far off
cross the road to the water
and into the hot high grass,
their feet light on the flattened
stalks of the cattails that line
the swale like pale raffia
woven expressly for that
 
purpose, as if the landscape
was a diorama made
of glassine, straw, and folded
paper. whose children are they —
one, two, three, walking to
the ruined, silvery, splintery
boat, that looks like a whale come
 
ashore in the pocket cove
which opens at high tide like
a giantess’s compact?
there is another smaller
shadow, pulling a kite — or
no, a pull-toy dog, which barks
at an upturned horseshoe crab
 
and a stained, eyeless, gray-brown
gull. how oddly sound travels
over water. underfoot
the sun-crazed hermit crabs run
helter-skelter to their bomb
shelters under the wet sand,
where at dead low tide the marsh
 
makes a kind of long, humped bridge
of itself to the rapt cove
and the ruined quiet. psst says
the wind. the children run at
it, lowing their heads, making
horns with their fingers, bashing
themselves in it and through it.
  x case sensitive
two days i’ve forgotten where i’m going,
new york’s crossword up and down a litter
of numbers and letters. i spin on the grid,
round hole in a square peg, each step a rope
bridge hung in air, my tongue a troll who eats
my words, my goat-fur cloak held fast by pysche’s
brooch. “smile, libling, you have your whole life
ahead of you.” hold on tight. even the dead
won’t speak to me, my sharp hooves beating
the bank’s slick grass, the bog oak’s muddy rune.
bee disheveled on the stairs, the storm
rattling the panes. “i dreamed i walked and walked
and could not find my way.” dear god, let me
keep my dreams to myself and do no harm.