for a flag! i answered facetiously. a flag of tomorrow,
fluent in fire, not just the whispers, lisps, not just the still there
of powdered wigs, dry winds. who wants a speckled
drape that folds as easy over smirch as fallen soldier?
this is rhetorical. like, "what to the negro
is the fourth of july?" a flag should be stitched with a fuse.
jefferson said for each generation a flag. maybe
he said constitution. i once raised a high-top flag
of my hair, a fist, a leather medallion of the motherland.
i studied heraldry and maniples (which are not
what you might guess), little sails and banners
down to the vane of a feather. because his kids were
rebel cities my father loved like sherman. because
i wanted history i could touch like the flank of a beast.
my wife's people are from san salvador. they sent us
with a guard, his ak shouldered like a mandolin, among
anil-tinted shawls and jerseys, across tiled and pocked
concrete, and the gated stalls of el centra. i felt sacred
as a goat there, too, as i did below the mason-dixon
where our only protection was the fourteenth amendment.
afraid our yankee plates would be read aggressive as a jolly
roger we rented a compact in atlanta. charleston, savannah,
montgomery, and after birmingham we were broke.
skipped selma. slept at b&bs where my dreams power-
washed layers of footnotes and februaries, revealing
the surreal sheen of apollo creed's trunks, the apocalyptic
americana of jacko moonwalking around a tinfoil buzz
aldrin planting the corporate ensign. years passed. i grew
youthless in my dad-pants, but still puffed at pinwheels
and windsocks, launched glyphs of grillsmoke and one day
it came to me, as if commissioned, theaster gates's flag
from old fire hoses, a couple dozen, like vertical blinds, no,
like cabin floorboards of canvas colored rusty, brick dust, some
cheerless drab-and-custard, beside a medley of vespertine
blues, hoses evoking landscapes of sackcloth and gunny,
texture of violence and tongues inflamed by shine, holy ghost.
ross, duchamp, johns, et al., are integrated here with officers
of the peace, their dogs, and, in evidence, their pretend
tumescence gates has hung to cure like pelts
or strips of jerky.
how did it feel to shield spirit with flesh? i mean,
what did it do to the body, water furry as the arm
of an arctic bear? what thirst did it ignite?
gates's salute is a torch song, a rhythm
of hues marching over a pentimento of rhyme.
i approve its message, its pledge to birth a nation
of belonging and to teach that nation of the fire
shut up in our bones.
 