such as there was in the littleness of that dawn
could not be this. not, certainly, the hove
of an invasion fleet from angleterre,
flotilla wrought of shipwright, chandler, armorer
as if ice age breeding stocks were on the move.
the planners had their weather oracles,
haruspices their entrails. all divined
the red planet aligned, full-moon
visibility, high tides to clear
the beachhead obstacles — but iffy weather.
gulls glean the wakes. something of a factory —
diesel and air and the jersey spirit spark —
of the hydrocarbon gloriana makes
ungainly way in the valleys of the swells.
the shore emerges quaquaversally.
a very pistol throats the air. battlewagons
wheel for the presentation of the agon.
shades of sherry fill the clouds with light.
mike boats enter surf’s unscrolling rolls.
empty jaws agape, the gods take note.
the odors of the offering, so rich
they start saliva flowing, must be painful
for the gods: not preamble for the meal,
the meal itself. famished
they try to gorge the oily cooking smoke.
amphibious landings to prevail require
the triumph of the small; circle in circle
perfected on parade grounds of the soul.
committing an empire to the fire
calls for just-in-time ferocity.
they eat the savage honey. the boys pound sand.
green eyes gammoning they all pound sand
until for the battle there was nothing left that day
but what the carrion patrols collect
for paternosterers to sacristy.
they’re strong, these irish penny whistle songs.
just the one wild tone working alone
the registers, trying the proper sound
for sorrow. ours for theirs,
theirs for theirs, ours for ours.
so many shouldering forward, enjambed
now cross the styx with the ease of smoke
passing through a window screen    ...    depart
the shapes of things continuing for shapes
supercooled to the stillness of mortmain.
the business of the flag is never done.
it fills in the wind and fails, but never the same
akimbo twice. each snap a fresh report
from acres of tended lawn
rankled by crosses perfectly plumb.