where ever something breathes
heart beating the rise and fall
of mountains, the waves upon the sky
of seas, the terror is our ignorance, that’s
why it is named after our home, earth
where art is locked between
gone and destination
the destiny of some other where and feeling
the ape knew this, when his old lady pulled him up
off the ground. was he grateful, ask him he’s still sitting up there
watching the sky’s adventures, leaving two holes for his own. oh sing
gigantic burp past the insects, swifter than the ugly stanleys on the ground
catching monkey meat for hyenagators, absolute boss of what does not
arrive in time to say anything. we hear that eating, that doo dooing, that
burping, we had a nigro mayor used to burp like poison zapalote
waddled into the cave of his lust. we got a spring jasper now, if
you don’t like that
woid, what about courtesan, dreamed out his own replacement sprawled
across the velvet cash register of belching and farting, his knick names when they
let him be played with. some call him puck, was love, we thought, now a rubber
flat blackie banged across the ice, to get past our goli, the africannibus of memory.
here. we have so many wedged between death and passivity. like eyes that collide
with reality and cannot see anything but the inner abstraction of flatus, a
biography, a car, a walk to the guillotine, james the first, giuliani the second
when he tries to go national, senators will stab him, ides of march or not. maybe
both will die, james 1 and caesar 2, as they did in the past, where we can read about
the justness of their assassinations
as we swig a little brew and laugh at the perseverance
of disease at higher and higher levels of its elimination.
we could see anything we wanted to. be anything we knew how to be. build
anything we needed. arrive anywhere we should have to go. but time is as stubborn
as space, and they compose us with definition, time place and condition.
the howlees the yowlees the yankees the super left streamlined post racial ideational
chauvinists creeep at the mouth of the venal cava. they are protesting fire and
looking askance at the giblets we have learned to eat. “it’s nobody’s heart,” they
say, and we agree. it’s the rest of some thing’s insides. along with the flowers, the
grass, the tubers, the river, pieces of the sky, earth, our seasoning, baked
throughout. what do you call that the anarchist of comfort asks,
food, we say, making it up as we chew. yesterday we explained language.